
There is no such thing as a meritocracy. Society will always have power imbalances which favour some and stifle others. However, when left unchecked these imbalances grow and crystallize to form structures. Power is weaponized in the duality of privilege and discrimination but all three are invisible. If deep, structural power imbalances exist in our society then we have gone off course.

We have gone off course.

Structural casteism exists, obviously. The adjective is redundant. [1] Structural racism exists, insidiously. We segregate with the tone of our voice, body language, and unwritten rules that dictate who belongs (and who does not). [2,3] Structural sexism exists, inside your house. How to see a structure built over thousands of years, woven into the fabric of society? [4] To course correct is to make this structure visible.

It is not our intention to pontificate. Sermons help no one but we must identify the problem if we hope to discover solutions. We are making efforts to attack this ubiquitous structure. Small things matter --- if we can keep spare toothbrushes in office bathrooms we can surely keep clearly-labeled pads and tampons beside them. So we do. And we can surely have an open and honest conversation about menstruation. So we did. And there is no civilized way to break taboos without a strong menstrual leave policy. So we have one. [5] We have symmetrical maternity and paternity leave because everyone belongs to a family. But these small things should be policies at _every company_. We need more than fairness --- we need equity.

To that end, nilenso runs ClojureBridge: free Clojure workshops for underrepresented groups. We sponsor conference attendance for women and non-binary participants. We work with aligned clients who are also chipping away at these structures --- network effects amplify our efforts. We have changed our hiring policy. For years, nilenso did not actively hire college grads but we now have a college recruitment program for female and non-binary students. We are still (and will always be) hiring senior developers from any background. But we must create and expand opportunities for underrepresented groups.

At the risk of self-conceit, we want to create opportunities for more people to join nilenso because we think nilenso is a pretty cool company. As an employee-owned co-operative, we aren't fueled by the pedestrian dreams of venture capitalists. We help Go-Jek drivers execute over 3 million orders per day and we build open source healthcare services with Simple.org because these projects are exciting. The software we build improves millions of lives. We want to continue to improve the world around us, with you.

We know we won't overturn the structures of discrimination tomorrow. This is a lifelong job. A significant part of the job is _listening_. If we can do better, tell us how.

If you really want to help us learn and grow, join us. ♥



--

References (remove before publication)

[1] Early Indians (This requires more relevant references.)
[2] Why I'm No Longer Talking to White People About Race
[3] White Fragility
[4] Sapiens? (This requires a much stronger reference.)
[5] https://blog.nilenso.com/blog/2016/05/16/i-have-cramps/
