
Your first day at nilenso! Welcome! Come on in and grab a chai. Let me show you around!

Before we look at the company व्याकरण, nilenso's handbook, I just wanted to say that it's very cool to have met you at in/clojure. Did you know we sponsored 16 underrepresented participants this year, who otherwise couldn't attend? I know, I know... tooting our own horn. But now it's also your horn to toot! We're not just helping people get to conferences, though. We help run RailsGirls and ClojureBridge, we're actively recruiting female and non-binary students from colleges, and we have an internship program for underrepresented groups as well. Diversity isn't all policy, obviously. Some folks tell us they get the most inspiration from seeing senior role models like Nivedita and Deepa in their jobs as executives, tech leads, and project managers.

Strong role models matter a lot at nilenso because we hope you'll become a part of our decision-making process sooner than later. As an employee-owned co-operative, we aren't fueled by the pedestrian dreams of venture capitalists. We don't even have "founders". Everyone who works here owns the business and helps set direction, including you. We can have a look at the व्याकरण now to see what that really means... see here, under "Paperwork, Co-operative Agreement"? You can read it later but the tl;dr is this: employee ownership, transparency, and an open decision-making process at nilenso are baked into our legal constitution.

The handbook has more fun stuff! See? 3 months of learning with weekly feedback... that's where you'll be starting. We want to help you master your skills. In those three months, you'll build working open source with feedback from senior nilenso devs. The goal is to give you a huge head start on your first billable project.

Billable projects? Oh yeah. It's easier if I show you -- let's go for a tour. These folks on the ground floor are building Simple.org: an open source healthcare system for managing hypertension across the globe. On the first floor, we have one group building an Elixir video streaming system for millions of concurrent users and another set of folks writing Haskell for digital financial transactions in India. And of course there are the folks who build Go-Jek's Clojure systems that process over 3 million orders per day for over a million drivers.

There's a lot more to show you... bicycle equipment, our menstrual leave policy, the library, our guidelines for remote working... but there's plenty of time to see all of that later. Shall we clone your first nilenso git repo and get you started?
